---
title: Enter, Update, Exit
layout: post
output:
  md_document:
    preserve_yaml: true
---

_Modifying the DOM with data_

[Code](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/tree/main/examples/week5/week5-1), [Recording](https://mediaspace.wisc.edu/media/Week+5+-+1A+Enter%2C+Update%2C+Exit/1_zlg7rdsy)

1. In interactive visualization, we often need to add or remove elements from
the previous static view. Alternatively, we may choose to modify visual
encodings to create an updated view emphasizing different characteristics of the
data. Both tasks can be accomplished using D3’s enter-exit-update pattern. This
pattern is so common that it is often called D3’s “general update pattern.”

2. The pattern operates on D3 selections that are already bound to data stored
in an array. If we bind a new dataset to the same selection, there are two types
of changes we need to account for,

	* The number of array elements may no longer match the number of HTML tags.
	* The values stored in each array element might have changed, and we might need visual encodings to update to reflect those changed values.

3. For the first issue, there are two functions that are helpful for resolving
the discrepancy,

	* `.enter()` refers to the array elements that don’t have corresponding HTML
	  tags. It is most often used to append new SVG objects to the original
	  selection.
	* `.exit()` refers to HTML tags that no longer have associated array elements.
	  It is most often used to remove tags that are no longer needed (because the
	  data has become smaller).

4. Let’s tinker with these ideas in a more hands on example. First, I will bind
a sequence of 10 numbers to a selection of circles and then append them to a
parent SVG. The circles’ x-coordinates are determined by the number in the
array. The `.enter()` is used to append these initial 10 array elements to the
screen.

  ```
  let circles = d3.range(10);

  d3.select("svg")
    .selectAll("circle")
    .data(circles).enter()
    .append("circle")
    .attrs({
      r: 10,
      cx: d => (d + 1) * 50,
      cy: 100,
    })
  ```

  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-1.html" width=800></iframe>

5. Now, suppose we add three additional elements to the circles array.
  ```
	circles = circles.concat([10, 11, 12])
  ```
	How can we add associated elements to the page without having to redraw
	everything? We can rebind the data and use `.enter()` again. This time, when
	we call `d3.select("svg").selectAll("circle")`, D3 recognizes the 10 circles
	from before. But since the array now includes 13 elements, the `.enter()`
	command realizes that there are potentially three new HTML elements that could
	be drawn. These candidate elements are drawn using the `.append("circle")`
	call,  and we've filled them in a different color, so you can see that it’s
	not just redrawing circles for all 13 elements in the array.

  ```
  d3.select("svg")
    .selectAll("circle")
    .data(circles).enter()
    .append("circle")
    .attrs({
    	r: 10,
    	cx: d => (d + 1) * 50,
    	cy: 100,
    	fill: "red"
    })
  ```

  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-2.html" width=800></iframe>

6. Similar logic works for exits. Suppose that instead of adding three elements,
we had removed three.
  ```
	circles = circles.slice(3)
  ```

	Now, there are three more HTML circle elements than there are data entries in
	the bound `circles` array. We can refer to the tags that no longer have data
	bound to them using `.exit()`. The block below shades those points in blue.
  ```
	d3.select("svg")
	  .selectAll("circle")
	  .data(circles).exit()
	  .attr("fill", "blue")
  ```

  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-3.html" width=800></iframe>

7. Notice that the logic of `enter` and `exit` is tied closely with the indices
of the arrays given to `.data()`. These functions simply check the lengths of
arrays across data binds, always associating the first tag on the page with the
first element in the array, the second tag with the second element, etc. In the
future, we'll see how to bind data using ID function rather than simply their
index, but for the purpose of this visualization, plain indexing is sufficient.

8. The enter and exit patterns are commonly coupled with transitions, to allow
for smoother fade in / out. For example,  we could first append them with radius
0 and then increase their size following a transition.

  ```
  circles = circles.concat([10, 11, 12])
  d3.select("svg")
    .selectAll("circle")
    .data(circles).enter()
    .append("circle")
    .attrs({                  // append circles at
          cx: d => (d + 1) * 50,  // right position, but
          cy: 100,                // invisibly
          r: 0,
          fill: "red"
    })
    .transition()
    .duration(2000)
    .attr("r", 10)            // grow the circles
  ```

  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-4.html" width=800></iframe>

9. Alternatively, if we want to gradually shrink the circles before they
disappear, we can change their radius attribute and then call `.remove()` to
remove the tags from the DOM.
  ```
	circles = circles.slice(3)
	d3.select("svg")
	  .selectAll("circle")
	  .data(circles).exit()
	  .transition()
	  .duration(4000)
	  .attr("r", 0)
	  .remove()
  ```

<iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-5.html" width=800></iframe>

10. What if want to change attributes for all tags, and not just those that were
entered / exited? There are several strategies. The simplest is to reselect all
matching items. For example, if we want all circles to be red, not just those
that were entered, we could use

  ```
  circles = circles.concat([10, 11, 12])
  d3.select("svg")
    .selectAll("circle")
    .data(circles).enter()
    .append("circle")
    .attrs({
      cx: d => (d + 1) * 50,
      cy: 100,
      r: 10,
      fill: "red"
    })

  d3.select("svg")
    .selectAll("circle")
    .attr("fill", "red")
  ```
  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-6.html" width=800></iframe>
  but this is inefficient, because it will change attributes even for the
  entered elements, which we already know have the correct attributes.

1. A more efficient alternative is to use `.join()` to distinguish between enter
and update selections. Here, `.join()` is able to wrap `enter, exit,` and
`update` selections, which refer to (i) new array elements that aren't
associated with tags, (ii) HTML elements which don't have corresponding array
elements, and (iii) HTML elements which have previously appended HTML elements.
For example, in the code below, we've modified the `update` selection to blue
while appending the new enter selection in `red`.
```
circles = circles.concat([10, 11, 12])
d3.select("svg")
  .selectAll("circle")
  .data(circles)
  .join(
      enter => enter.append("circle")
        .attrs({
          r: 10,
          cx: d => (d + 1) * 50,
          cy: 100,
          fill: "red"
        }),
      update => update.attr("fill", "blue")
    )
```

<iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week5/week5-1/circleSequence-7.html" width=800></iframe>
