---
title: Types of Interactivity in D3
layout: post
output:
  md_document:
    preserve_yaml: true
---

_UI input elements and SVG interaction events_

[Code](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/tree/main/examples/week6/week6-1), [Recording](https://mediaspace.wisc.edu/media/Week%206%20-%201%3A%20Types%20of%20Interactivity%20in%20D3/1_xqbgmeha)

1. Any HTML page can support text, numeric, button, select, and slider inputs,
just like in Shiny. In fact, behind the scenes, Shiny inputs are simply R
wrappers of plain HTML input elements. For example, the HTML code below creates
an example of each of these inputs.
  ```
<input type="text"> Enter Something</input>
<button type="button">Click Me</button>
<label for="dropdown">Select an option...</label>
<select name="Select an Option" id="dropdown">
  <option value="optA">Option A</option>
  <option value="optB">Option B</option>
  <option value="optC">Option C</option>
</select>
<input type="range" min="0", max="1" step="0.1">This is a slider</input>
  ```
  This is what the page looks like,
  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week6/week6-1/inputs.html"></iframe>
  The default styling for input elements are not that attractive. Fortunately,
  many people have come up with CSS rules to create more attractive components.
  For example, by applying classes defined in [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.0/forms/overview/) (the same library behind `bslib`), almost the same HTML code as above yields the more modern page
  below.

  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week6/week6-1/inputs-bs.html"></iframe>

2. An aside about `select` inputs: We can define the selection options using a
data bind. Contrast the manual implementation
[[1](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/blob/main/examples/week6/week6-1/manual-select.html),
[2](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/blob/main/examples/week6/week6-1/manual-select.js)]
of the gapminder visualization that enters the options in the HTML code with
this binding-based alternative
[[3](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/blob/main/examples/week6/week6-1/d3-select.html),
[4](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/blob/main/examples/week6/week6-1/d3-select.js)]
that uses the function `setup_inputs` to create input elements using an array
of continent names.
3. In addition to these separate interface elements, we can “listen” for
specific kinds of user interactions. In web programming, objects that register
specific types of user interactions are called event listeners. For example, we
can use a listener to register hover events when the mouse moves over a specific
HTML element. Let’s look at basic versions of these events on a canvas with just
a few randomly located circles.
<iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week6/week6-1/svg-inputs.html" width=800 height=500></iframe>

5. Click events are defined using an `.on(“click”, function)` added to a D3
selection. For example, this will print to the console every time the second
circle is clicked.

  ```
function f2() {
  console.log("Clicked!")
}

d3.select("#circle2")
  .on("click", f2)
  ```
  Note that, if we wanted to print whenever any element from a selection was
  clicked, we simply add `.on("click", function)` to the full selection. For
  example, we could use this to run a function whenever any point within a
  scatterplot is clicked (the same principle applies to all listeners in these
  notes).

7. If we just want to detect whether the user’s mouse has moved over an element,
we can use `.on("mousemove", function)`. We can also keep track of the user’s
mouse position using `d3.pointer(event)`, where `event` refers to an event
object that is pass into the function by default,

  ```
  function f4(event) {
    console.log(d3.pointer(event))
  }

  d3.select("#circle4")
    .on("mousemove", f4)
  ```

8. We can even distinguish between when the mouse has just entered or exited an
SVG element using `on("mouseover", ...)` and `.on(“mouseout”, ...)`.
9. Brushes are defined using `d3.brush()`. They can be applied to a `<g>`
element using `.call()` applied to the group (otherwise, they will not appear).
  ```
  let brush = d3.brush().on("brush", f)
  d3.select(".brush").call(brush) // the <g> element was given class "brush"
  ```

  <iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week6/week6-1/brush.html" width=800 height=200></iframe>

10. The `.on("brush", f)` element at the end of the brush definition will make
sure to call `f` every time the brush is moved. Like hover events, we can
distinguish between when brushes have been just moved or whether the user has
lifted their mouse up. In Shiny, we were only able to update a brush selection
after the users’ mouse had moved, so this is going to allow us to create
smoother visualizations.
11. To access the pixel coordinates of the brush's bounding box, we can use the
`selection` attribute of the event object that is passed into the `brush`
function. For example, the code above is printing the pixel coordinates each
time the brush is modified.

  ```
  function f(event) {
    console.log(event.selection)
  }
  ```

12. Finally, we can create [multiple
brushes](http://bl.ocks.org/ludwigschubert/0236fa8594c4b02711b2606a8f95f605)
simultaneously, which had been impossible in Shiny. This is handy for sketching
out complex shapes in time series, like in the [Time Searcher](https://hci.stanford.edu/courses/cs448b/papers/Hocheiser_TimeSearcher_2002-06.pdf).
