---
title: Click and Hover Interaction in D3 (Part 2)
layout: post
output:
  md_document:
    preserve_yaml: true
---

_Voronoi mouse over and graphical queries_

[Code](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/tree/main/examples/week6/week6-3), [Recording](https://mediaspace.wisc.edu/media/Week%206%20-%203%3A%20Click%20and%20Hover%20Interaction%20in%20D3%20(Part%202)/1_onon3q5m)

1. In our previous notes, we saw how to use hover and click events to define
user interaction in D3 visualizations. In these notes, we’ll consider two
extensions that can lead to more effective interfaces: Voronoi mouseover effects
and click-based graphical queries.
2. Our earlier [hover implementations](https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_notes/2022/06/01/week6-2.html) can be frustrating to use, because they
require that we place our mouse exactly on top of one of the scatterplot
circles. If the circles were any smaller than they are, interaction would be
essentially impossible.
3. A better strategy is to use a Voronoi mouseover. This is just a fancy way of
saying that we should register a mouseover whenever the mouse moves near to, but
not exactly on, a potential object of interest. Specifically, we will register a
mouse event whenever the nearest neighbor of the mouse’s current position
changes. I'm showing the background neighborhoods with the thin grey lines, but
in a real-world implementation, these boundaries would be not be drawn.
<iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week6/week6-2/imdb-voronoi.html" width=700 height=500></iframe>

4. The main idea is to create a `d3.Delaunay` object which can be used to
compute the nearest neighboring datapoint of a mouse at coordinate position `(x, y)`. This can be implemented by using D3’s [Delauny triangulation library](https://github.com/d3/d3-delaunay). The first argument of
`d3.Delanay.from()` defines the dataset from which to build neighborhoods. The
second and third identify the `x` and `y` pixel positions associated with each
data point.

  ```
  let delaunay = d3.Delaunay.from(data, d => scales.x(d.IMDB_Rating), d => scales.y(d.Rotten_Tomatoes_Rating)),
  ```

5. We next register whenever the mouse moves on the background SVG and
recalculate the nearest neighbor using the `.find()` method from Delaunay. Using
the same logic as in our previous hover example, we can then update the location
of the tooltip to reflect this mouseover events. The resulting interaction is
much smoother than our previous implementation.

```
d3.select("svg").on("mousemove", (ev) => mouseover(ev, data, delaunay, scales))

...

function mouseover(ev, data, delaunay, scales) {
  let ix = delaunay.find(ev.pageX, ev.pageY);

  d3.select("#tooltip")  // first move tooltip to current datapoint's location
    .attr("transform", `translate(${scales.x(data[ix].IMDB_Rating)}, ${scales.y(data[ix].Rotten_Tomatoes_Rating)})`)
    .select("text")
    .text(data[ix].Title); // fill in the current movie's name
```

6. Next, let’s consider how to improve click events through graphical queries.
Recall from our Shiny discussion that it can be helpful to define queries using
separate, adjacent visualizations. This increases the information density of a
visualization and minimizes the need for additional interface elements.
7. As a specific example, let’s modify the legend click selection from the
previous notes so that the legend is actually a barchart showing the frequencies
of the different movie types. In this way, the legend has been modified to
encode more information.

<iframe src="https://krisrs1128.github.io/stat679_code/examples/week6/week6-3/imdb-linked.html" width=650 height=400></iframe>

9. To implement this change, we created a new dataset, `stats.csv`, associated
with the genre totals. We read in both simultaneously using the following syntax,
  ```
Promise.all([
    d3.csv("movies.csv", d3.autoType),
    d3.csv("stats.csv", d3.autoType),
]).then(visualize)
  ```
  and we have updated our `make_scales` function to include `x` and `y`
  coordinate scales associated with the bar chart.

10.	Now, when we create rectangles representing the legend elements, we can bind
the associated genre counts.
  ```
d3.select("#bars")
  .selectAll("rect")
  .data(stats).enter()
  .append("rect")
  ... attributes using scales
  ```
  The width of each bar is set using the total associated with each genre,
  ```
.attrs({
  ...
  width: d => scales.x2(d.n),
  ...
})
  ```

11. At this point, we can use the same update function from our [earlier implementation](https://github.com/krisrs1128/stat679_code/blob/main/examples/week6/week6-3/imdb-legend-click.js) to toggle whether a movie should be highlighted or not.

  ```
  [selection defining the legend bars]
  .on("click", (ev, d) => toggle_selection(ev, d.Genre))
  ```
